End-to-End SPENs

A. Appendix
A.1. General Learning Setup
The method described in Sections 3 and 4 provides a gradient of the loss with respect to the parameters of the model.
To update the parameters, one can use any standard optimization method for neural networks. Our experiments use
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with default settings. SPENs
are vulnerable to overfitting, as the energy network is often very expressive. We reduce overfitting by performing
early stopping, by taking the model that performs best on
development data. Often, we have found that early stopping with a model that has a higher capacity energy (e.g.,
higher-dimensional hidden layers in the energy network) is
superior to using a low-capacity energy.
A.2. Architectures for SRL Experiments
A.2.1. BASELINE A RC -FACTORED A RCHITECTURE
Our baseline is an arc-factored model for the conditional
probability of the predicate-argument arc labels:
P(r|x, p, a) = ⇧i P(ri |x, p, a).

(18)

where P(ri |x, p, a) / exp g(ri , x, p, a) . Here, each
conditional distribution is given by a logistic regression
model. We compute g(ri , x, p, a) using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) similar to FitzGerald et al. (2015). Its inputs are discrete features extracted from the argument span
and the predicate (including words, pos tags, and syntactic dependents), and the dependency path and distance between the argument and the predicate. These features are
transformed to a 300-dimensional representation linearly,
where the embeddings of word types are initialized using
newswire embeddings from (Mikolov et al., 2013). We
map from 300 dimensions to 250 to 47 (the number of semantic roles in CoNLL) using linear transformations separated by tanh layers. We apply dropout to the embedding
layer with rate 0.5 and a standard log loss.
A.2.2. G LOBAL E NERGY T ERM FOR SPEN
From the pre-trained model Eq. (18), we define fr as the
predicate-argument arc features, We also have predicate
features fp and argument feature fa , given by the average
word embedding of the token spans. The hidden layers
of any MLP below are 50-dimensional. Each MLP is two
layers, with a SoftPlus in the middle. All parameters are
trained discriminatively using end-to-end training.
Let yp 2 m
be the sub-tensor of y for a given predicate p
AP
and let zp = k yp [:, k] 2 [0, 1]m , where zp [a] is the total
amount of mass assigned to the arc between predicate p and
argument a, obtained
Pby summing over possible labels. We
also define wp = k yp [k, :] 2 RA
+ . This is a length-A

vector containing how much total mass of each P
arc label
is assigned to predicate p. Finally, define sr = k y[:, :
, k]. This is the total mass assigned to arc r, obtained by
summing over the possible labels that the arc can take on.
The global energy is defined by the sum of the following
terms. The first energy term scores the set of arguments
attached to each predicate. It computes a weighted average
of the features fa for the arguments assigned to predicate p,
with weights given by zp . It then concatenates this with fp ,
and passes the result through a two-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that returns a single number. The total energy is the sum of the MLP output for every predicate. The
second energy term scores the labels of the arcs attached to
each predicate. We concatenate fp with wp and pass this
through an MLP as above. The third energy term models how many arguments a predicate should take on. For
each predicate, we predict how many arguments should attach to it, using a linear function applied to fp . The energy
is set to the squared difference between this and the total
mass
P attached to the predicate under y, which is given by
k wp [k]. The fourth energy term averages wp over all p
and applies an MLP to the result. The fifth term computes a
weighted average of the arc features fr , with weights given
by sr and also applies an MLP to the result. The last two
terms capture general topical coherence of the prediction.

